--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A list of common Problems:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Problems with SuSe Linux 6.4 and 7.0 (Personal and Professional)!!

If ARB doesn't start after the installation of SuSe Linux 6.4/7.0
("no such file"-error) you have to install the ShlibS5 library from
the Linux CD's manually. Go to the Yast menu and search for the ShlibS5
library in the packages, select it and install it.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I have two questions more.
First of all is about the Probe design. When I am trying to run the program it
starts (I have the strains selected, and everything seems to be correct), and
when it starts to run appears a window that says that it cannot open the server
ARB_PT_SEVERO. So it doesn't work.

	Problems:	1.	You forgot to create the index file for the pt_server.
				Load your database, open the ETC/Probe/PT_SERVER admin window
				Chosse your server and press update. Than wait ( 1hour)

			2.	the link ${ARBHOME}/lib/pts points to no valid directory.
				Goto the directory where arb_install is located.
				Enter 'sh ./arb_install', do not update the old package
				but enter the correct location for the pt_server files
				when asked

			3.	Consult the <PT_SERVER What Why and How> online help

After some time I cannot start the PT_SERVER any more. I have to reboot the computer.

	Problems:	You have an old version of ARB.
			Download the new version and install it.



I am looking for signatures for some algal taxonomic groups.
I am not sure I understand what the PT_SERVER is. I guess that we have
to load rRNA data in /$ARBHOME/lib/etc ? The rrna.arb,
16s_rrna_align.arb etc. are not in the ARB package? Am I right? I
wonder how I can load my alignment in this PT_SERVER, so that I can
design probes for the groups I am interested in?

	Solution:	1.	Load your data and update the pt_server (only your private
				data will be accessible).
			2.	Merge your data with Wolfgang Ludwigs database and
				update the pt_server afterwards.

When I want to aligne a sequence, it gave a fatal error : out of memory
(in the message box). So extra memory was installed. Also the amount of hard
disk has been increased, due to the message (console message : alert : arb
_naligner[3151]-out of logical swap space during brk/sbrk-see swap (im).
After the instalations these problems were not solved. The computer needs a
lot of time performing a command

	Problem:	Don't mix real memory with swap. The swap extends the real memory,
			Example:	A computer has 32 MBytes of RAM and 100 mBytes Swap->
					a total of 132 mBytes. After doubling the RAM to 64 mB
					you get a total of 164 mBytes, only 25% more.
			That does not mean that it is senseless to add new memory, it simply
			adds speed to your applications.

	Solution:	Check your swap ( try the command 'swap -s', or 'free' or 'top'
			or 'swapon -v', or if failed read the
			manual pages ( 'man -k swap' or man swap );
			There should be at least 150 mbytes swap. It is not to difficult to
			add new swap to your system, normally it just means creating a file
			and telling the system that that file should be added as swap. Consult
			the man pages for more details.

	Note:		Sometimes the aligner V2  needs an extreme amount of memory. If so
			switch to the new FastAligner in the new ARB_EDIT4 sequence editor,
			of which a prototype is available since Mai 97.


I have installed ARB on a Linux PC and everything works fine. Except if I try to login from
a PC with Vista Exceed installed: ARB says:
		> ARB:Loading '/data/arb/lib/arb_default/ntree.arb' done
		> Error: Can't open display:

	Problem:	Your enviroment variable DISPLAY is not set correctly.
	Solution:	Start a xterm, type	'DISPLAY='Your Vista Exceeds IP Adress:0.0'
						'export DISPLAY'
			or (if working with csh) setenv DISPLAY 'IP-address:0.0'


- Clustalw seems to be running OK except that the output dissappears. The
message box says: Internal error: unknown type of file /tmp/gde5537_x

	Looks like a bug in the program. You can help me by sending me your dataset and
	describing exactly what you did till this error occur.
	Or create an account on your computer so I can login into it and check the bug.



I have attempted to import the new RDP tree into ARB. I have the new RDP
alignment and the tree imported in newick format in a database. However, the
tree seems to be 'inactive' in ARB, and it is all black ??? What can i do?

	The labels at the tips of the tree have to mach the 'name' field in the database.
	Otherwise you could a tree consisting of 'zombies'. All you can do is to change
	all the names in the newik file, which is a lot of work for a big tree.


I still have problems with the Probe design. I installed the latest version
of ARB, but it doesn't run properly. It is exteeemly slow. I had to let the
program run for a weekend to have it select a probe! It used to do that in a
few seconds or minutes. The output looks a little strange as the columns
with the numbers of non-matches comes out as 8-digit numbers (like
96366059). The Probe match works fine.
	I have solved the problem with the slow Probedesign. It turned out that I
	had not deleted the old ~/.arb_prop/* from the later varsions of ARB. Since the
	message did not turn up in the newer installations, I thought I only had to
	do that once. Now it runs really good.


I want to print the entire 16s rrna phylogenetic tree but have not been
able to print more than the first page.  Do you have any suggestions on
how to print more than one page?  I look forward to your response.

	The problem with printing multiple pages is, that we use a public domain
	postscript generator. It sends all pages at once to the printer and let's
	the printer split the document into multiple pages. Because of limited
	printer memory, many printers refuse to print more than x pages.
	There are two workarounds ( at least for linux users ):

	1.	Try to reduce the size of the tree being printed. Start with a fully
	collapsed tree and print it. Open group by group and print to find
	out the size of the tree your printer can handle (Note: folded groups
	are not send to the printer). To print the entire tree fold the groups
	at the bottom and print, than fold all group except some inner groups,
	..., finally fold everything except the last groups.

	2.	Try to install a non postscript printer ( for Linux users only ).
	( Use your native printer driver instead ).
	Linux can do the postscript precessing itself and your PC has much
	more memory than the printer







